VS-530 VDS creation documentation for AoU (#8169)
broadinstitute/gatk: scripts/variantstore/docs/aou/AOU_DELIVERABLES.md

  - [GvsWithdrawSamples](https://dockstore.org/my-workflows/github.com/broadinstitute/gatk/GvsWithdrawSamples) workflow
  - [GvsPopulateAltAllele](https://dockstore.org/my-workflows/github.com/broadinstitute/gatk/GvsPopulateAltAllele) workflow
  - [GvsCreateFilterSet](https://dockstore.org/my-workflows/github.com/broadinstitute/gatk/GvsCreateFilterSet) workflow

>   - [GvsExtractAvroFilesForHail](https://dockstore.org/my-workflows/github.com/broadinstitute/gatk/GvsExtractAvroFilesForHail) workflow (Hail VDS output)

Reviewer: no need to mention VDS since this doc is now only VDS output
```suggestion
  - [GvsExtractAvroFilesForHail](https://dockstore.org/my-workflows/github.com/broadinstitute/gatk/GvsExtractAvroFilesForHail) workflow
```

>   - [GvsPrepareRangesCallset](https://dockstore.org/my-workflows/github.com/broadinstitute/gatk/GvsPrepareRangesCallset) workflow (Hail VDS output -- used for callset stats)

Reviewer: see above
```suggestion
  - [GvsPrepareRangesCallset](https://dockstore.org/my-workflows/github.com/broadinstitute/gatk/GvsPrepareRangesCallset) workflow
```

    - This workflow does not use the Terra Data Entity Model to run, so be sure to select the `Run workflow with inputs defined by file paths` workflow submission option.
11. `GvsCallsetStatistics` workflow
    -  You will need to have "Storage Object View" access granted for your @pmi-ops proxy group on the `gs://broad-dsp-spec-ops/gvs/truth` directory
12. `GvsCallsetCost` workflow
    - This workflow calculates the total BigQuery cost of generating this callset (which is not represented in the Terra UI total workflow cost) using the above GVS workflows; it's used to calculate the cost as a whole and by sample.
    - Note that the VDS creation cost based on the VM time will have to be added and the Avro extraction was not included at the time of this readme note

## Deliverables (via email to stakeholders once the above steps are complete)
1. GCS location of the VDS (the `--vds-path` input from `hail_gvs_import.py`)
2. fully qualified name of the BigQuery dataset (composed of the `project_id` and `dataset_name` inputs from the workflows)
3. CSV output from `GvsCallsetStatistics` workflow (see step #11 above)

> 4. TSV output from `GvsCalculatePrecisionAndSensitivity` workflow (see step #12 above)

Author: hahaha well this has been wrong for a while then, or I deleted the real step 12?

> 4. TSV output from `GvsCalculatePrecisionAndSensitivity` workflow (see step #12 above)

Author: I will add it back lol

11. `GvsCalculatePrecisionAndSensitivity` workflow
    - You will need to have "Storage Object View" access granted for your @pmi-ops proxy group on the `gs://broad-dsp-spec-ops/gvs/truth` directory
    - This workflow needs to be run with the control sample chr20 vcfs from `GvsExtractCallset` step which were placed in the `output_gcs_dir`.
    - This workflow does not use the Terra Data Entity Model to run, so be sure to select the `Run workflow with inputs defined by file paths` workflow submission option.
12. `GvsCallsetCost` workflow
    - This workflow calculates the total BigQuery cost of generating this callset (which is not represented in the Terra UI total workflow cost) using the above GVS workflows; it's used to calculate the cost as a whole and by sample.

## Deliverables (via email to stakeholders once the above steps are complete)
1. GCS location of the VDS (the `--vds-path` input from `hail_gvs_import.py`)
2. fully qualified name of the BigQuery dataset (composed of the `project_id` and `dataset_name` inputs from the workflows)

> 3. CSV output from `GvsCallsetStatistics` workflow

Reviewer: Probably a good idea to link to vds/delivery/Delivering%20a%20VDS.md since that includes details of how to get the VDS to the AoU delivery bucket, naming conventions...etc.

Author: great idea

    - This workflow needs to be run with the `filter_set_name` input from `GvsCreateFilterSet` step.
    - This workflow does not use the Terra Data Entity Model to run, so be sure to select the `Run workflow with inputs defined by file paths` workflow submission option.
11. `GvsCalculatePrecisionAndSensitivity` workflow
    - You will need to have "Storage Object View" access granted for your @pmi-ops proxy group on the `gs://broad-dsp-spec-ops/gvs/truth` directory
    - This workflow needs to be run with the control sample chr20 vcfs from `GvsExtractCallset` step which were placed in the `output_gcs_dir`.
    - This workflow does not use the Terra Data Entity Model to run, so be sure to select the `Run workflow with inputs defined by file paths` workflow submission option.
12. `GvsCallsetCost` workflow
    - This workflow calculates the total BigQuery cost of generating this callset (which is not represented in the Terra UI total workflow cost) using the above GVS workflows; it's used to calculate the cost as a whole and by sample.

## Deliverables (via email to stakeholders once the above steps are complete)

> 1. GCS location of the VDS (the `--vds-path` input from `hail_gvs_import.py`)
> 2. Fully qualified name of the BigQuery dataset (composed of the `project_id` and `dataset_name` inputs from the workflows)
> 3. CSV output from `GvsCallsetStatistics` workflow
> 4. TSV output from `GvsCalculatePrecisionAndSensitivity` workflow
> 
> To get the VDS someplace secure and accessible for delivery, see [Delivering a VDS](vds/delivery/Delivering%20a%20VDS.md)
> This includes details of how to get the VDS to the AoU delivery bucket as well as VDS naming conventions.
> The Callset Stats and S&P files can be simply gsutil cp-ed to the AoU delivery bucket since they are so much smaller.

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
To get the VDS someplace secure and accessible for delivery, see [Delivering a VDS](vds/delivery/Delivering%20a%20VDS.md)
This includes details of how to get the VDS to the AoU delivery bucket as well as VDS naming conventions.
The Callset Stats and S&P files can be simply gsutil cp-ed to the AoU delivery bucket since they are so much smaller.
1. GCS location of the VDS in the AoU delivery bucket
2. Fully qualified name of the BigQuery dataset (composed of the `project_id` and `dataset_name` inputs from the workflows)
3. GCS location of the CSV output from `GvsCallsetStatistics` workflow in the AoU delivery bucket
4. GCS location of the TSV output from `GvsCalculatePrecisionAndSensitivity` in the AoU delivery bucket
```

   - This step calculates features from the `alt_allele` table, and trains the VQSR filtering model along with site-level QC filters and loads them into BigQuery into a series of `filter_set_*` tables.
   - See [naming conventions doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pNtuv7uDoiOFPbwe4zx5sAGH7MyxwKqXkyrpNmBxeow) for guidance on what to use for `filter_set_name`, which you will need to keep track of for the `GvsExtractCallset` WDL. If, for some reason, this step needs to be run multiple times, be sure to use a different `filter_set_name` (the doc has guidance for this, as well).
   - This workflow does not use the Terra Data Entity Model to run, so be sure to select the `Run workflow with inputs defined by file paths` workflow submission option.

> 7. `GvsExtractAvroFilesForHail` workflow (Hail VDS output)    

Reviewer: see above
```suggestion
7. `GvsExtractAvroFilesForHail` workflow    
```

>    - This workflow extracts the data in BigQuery and transforms it into Avro files in a Google bucket, incorporating the VQSR filter set data.  We suggest this method for callsets of more than 100k samples.

Reviewer: basically, the same as above
```suggestion
   - This workflow extracts the data in BigQuery and transforms it into Avro files in a Google bucket, incorporating the VQSR filter set data.
```

>    - The extracted Avro files will then be used as the input for the below notebook which can then be run to produce a Hail VDS

Reviewer: nits
```suggestion
   - The extracted Avro files will then be used as the inputs for the below notebook which will then be used to produce a Hail VDS.
```

   - This workflow does not use the Terra Data Entity Model to run, so be sure to select the `Run workflow with inputs defined by file paths` workflow submission option.

> 8. Run the VDS Extract using a notebook terminal and the python script `hail_gvs_import.py`

Reviewer: Where is this script file located?

   - This step creates a VDS based on the Avro files 

>    - Notebook provisioning suggestions can be found in the file: [AoU Delta VDS Cluster Configuration.md](vds/cluster/AoU Delta VDS Cluster Configuration.md)

Reviewer: link did not work when I viewed the file in Github
```suggestion
   - Notebook provisioning suggestions can be found in the file: [AoU Delta VDS Cluster Configuration.md](vds/cluster/AoU%20Delta%20VDS%20Cluster%20Configuration.md)
```

>    - `hail_gvs_import.py` is the python script that needs to be run in the notebook-- we suggest running it directly in the terminal

Reviewer: this seems redundant

   - inputs to the python script are:
     1. `--avro-path`: the directory path at which exported GVS Avro files are found in GCP
     2. `--vds-path`: the desired output path to which the VDS should be written

>      3. `--temp-path`: a convenient path to temporary directory (we suggest the GCP bucket of the workspace that the notebook is in) 

Reviewer: Do these path require (or break with) a leading "/"?

Reviewer: All three paths correspond to directories; do you know if they are expecting a leading "/" (e.g. "gs://my-bucket/my-dir/") or not (e.g. "gs://my-bucket/my-dir")?

Reviewer 2: They're all okay [with or without slashes](https://github.com/broadinstitute/gatk/blob/aa97a09a4467a1ff38892d4af6aa34463bf3ddac/scripts/variantstore/wdl/extract/hail_gvs_import.py#L134-L136).

Reviewer 2: As for `--temp-path` I would probably *not* suggest the bare bucket path as that might make a mess:

```suggestion
     1. `--avro-path`: the directory path at which exported GVS Avro files are found in GCP
     2. `--vds-path`: the desired output path to which the VDS should be written
     3. `--temp-path`: a convenient path to temporary directory. We suggest a folder under the GCP bucket of the workspace that the notebook is in, e.g. `gs://fc-<workspace-id>/hail_tmp`.
```

> 9. `GvsPrepareRangesCallset` workflow (Hail VDS output -- for callset stats)

Reviewer: see above
```suggestion
9. `GvsPrepareRangesCallset` workflow
```

>    - This workflow transforms the data in the vet tables into a schema optimized for VCF generation during the Extract step.
>    - It will need to be run once with `only_output_vet_tables` set to "true" (see [naming conventions doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pNtuv7uDoiOFPbwe4zx5sAGH7MyxwKqXkyrpNmBxeow) for guidance on what to use for `extract_table_prefix` or cohort prefix, which you will need to keep track of for the callset stats); the default value is `false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - It will need to be run after the VDS has been successfully created with `only_output_vet_tables` set to "true" (see [naming conventions doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pNtuv7uDoiOFPbwe4zx5sAGH7MyxwKqXkyrpNmBxeow) for guidance on what to use for `extract_table_prefix` or cohort prefix); the default value is `false`.
```

   - This workflow does not use the Terra Data Entity Model to run, so be sure to select the `Run workflow with inputs defined by file paths` workflow submission option.

> 10. Run the notebook to create callset stats (**TODO**, see [VS-388](https://broadworkbench.atlassian.net/browse/VS-388)), for which you need

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10. `GvsCallsetStatistics` workflow
```

   - "BigQuery Data Viewer" role for your @pmi-ops proxy group on the `spec-ops-aou:gvs_public_reference_data.gnomad_v3_sites` table
   - the Google project ID you used for all the GVS WDLs (`project_id` input)
   - the name of the BigQuery dataset you used for all the GVS WDLs (`dataset_name` input)
   - the `extract_table_prefix` input from `GvsExtractCallset` step

>    - the `filter_set_name` input from `GvsCreateFilterSet` step

Reviewer: nit: the formatting/structure for these should be the same as the other workflows

> 11. [GvsCalculatePrecisionAndSensitivity](../../tieout/AoU_PRECISION_SENSITIVITY.md#generating-callset-precision-and-sensitivity-values) workflow, for which you need

Reviewer: ```suggestion
11. `GvsCalculatePrecisionAndSensitivity.wdl` workflow
```

>    - "Storage Object View" access granted for your @pmi-ops proxy group on the `gs://broad-dsp-spec-ops/gvs/truth` directory

Reviewer: nit: to make it consistent with format/structure of other steps
```suggestion
    - you will need to have "Storage Object View" access granted for your @pmi-ops proxy group on the `gs://broad-dsp-spec-ops/gvs/truth` directory
```

> 12. `GvsCallsetCost`

Reviewer: see above
```suggestion
12. `GvsCallsetCost.wdl` workflow
```

>    - The cost from this callset, which represents the total BigQuery cost (which is not represented in the Terra UI total workflow cost) from the GVS pipeline workflows, is used to calculate the cost of the callset as a whole and by sample.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - This workflow calculates the total BigQuery cost of generating this callset (which is not represented in the Terra UI total workflow cost) using the above GVS workflows; it's used to calculate the cost as a whole and by sample.
```

   - This workflow does not use the Terra Data Entity Model to run, so be sure to select the `Run workflow with inputs defined by file paths` workflow submission option.
7. `GvsExtractAvroFilesForHail` workflow
   - This workflow extracts the data in BigQuery and transforms it into Avro files in a Google bucket, incorporating the VQSR filter set data.
   - The extracted Avro files will then be used as the inputs for the below notebook which will then be used to produce a Hail VDS.
   - This workflow does not use the Terra Data Entity Model to run, so be sure to select the `Run workflow with inputs defined by file paths` workflow submission option.
8. Run the VDS Extract using a notebook terminal and the python script [hail_gvs_import.py](scripts/variantstore/wdl/extract/hail_gvs_import.py)
   - This step creates a VDS based on the Avro files 

>    - Notebook provisioning suggestions can be found in the file: [AoU Delta VDS Cluster Configuration.md](vds/cluster/AoU%20Delta%20VDS%20Cluster%20Configuration.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Notebook provisioning suggestions and other necessary set up details (e.g. the Hail wheel to use) can be found in the file: [AoU Delta VDS Cluster Configuration.md](vds/cluster/AoU%20Delta%20VDS%20Cluster%20Configuration.md)
```

>    - We suggest running `hail_gvs_import.py` directly in the terminal

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
   - We suggest gsutil cp-ing `hail_gvs_import.py` to the notebook and then invoke it directly in the terminal
```

   - inputs to the python script are:

>      1. `--avro-path`: the directory path at which exported GVS Avro files are found in GCP

Reviewer 2: Per our earlier discussion the script generation here is definitely broken; the replacement logic is looking for the wrong values in the input template. Created [VS-809](https://broadworkbench.atlassian.net/browse/VS-809) to fix this.

>       1. `--avro-path`: the directory path at which exported GVS Avro files are found in GCP

Reviewer 2: the version of the script generated at `GenerateHailScripts/hail_gvs_import.py` should have set these to the correct defaults

Author: this needs to be investigated---it doesn't seem to be the case currently?
